So when you are five years old, I start school, primary school.
Okay, so to class two, when you are in class two, I go to school sometimes.
Sometimes I'm not good.
And my father is carpenter.
My father worked, someone makes someone is house, chair, table, this one, the wooden one.
Carpenter means wooden carpenter.
My mom is housewife at that time.
And my father, for Indian money, every day 20 rupees per day.
And my three, I'm three sisters, one brother.
So the one is baby, and the middle one and my brother go to school with me.
Then when you are in class two, then I'm seven years old.
And one day my father doing the work and my father fell there.
And my father broken legs, hand, back, everything.
And hospital, India everyone know hospital pay for everything.
Nothing to free India.
School, only primary school, class five is free.
Otherwise you pay for everything, medicine, doctor, school, college, everything is paid.
So when my father failed, and then someone came to my house and they say to my mom,
your husband failed and he is really in danger position.
And my mom and every children go run and there.
Then I, you know rickshaw?
Yes.
Rickshaw.
So I take my father in the rickshaw, the three wheeler rickshaw there,
and take to the hospital and nobody admit my father.
They say you have money to register and everything, pay for everything, bed and everything.
I said, my mom said don't have money.
And I'm just stand like this and I see all the thing.
And then say, okay, I can't admit this person without money.
And then that time is Indian four o'clock.
And then again come back home and you know the house is not like this, small, small house like
called Jhopadpatti, I don't know what is English, I don't know.
Huts.
So my father put some mattress, not mattress, you know the chattai and everything and my mat
and my father sleep there.
All night my father cry.
That time I realized without money nothing to this life, no education, nothing to do.
I make money.
I don't know how do I make money but I'm realized seven years old children how to feel when
your father cry.
And then I'm decide same day night time I'm decide I'm never go anywhere, school nothing
I'm go to work.
I need money to treatment my father.
And next day I ask some lot of people I ask have some work, have some work.
Nobody agree with me.
My mom don't know this one.
And then I say okay and one girl is my neighbor she work in the Calcutta town and I'm go there.
Luckily she that time is holiday time.
So I call like auntie, I say auntie I need a work.
What?
I say I need a work.
I make money to my treatment my father.
And they say are you crazy?
You seven years old.
I say I don't mind.
I need any work.
And she know my family situation and my situation and she said I know someone they need some
someone to look after baby.
Only sit with baby and play with baby.
You will do this one.
Maybe good for you.
And they say you really agree with this one.
I say can't say to my mom okay.
Can't say to anyone.
I'm just pick up my that time I just wear frock and underpants.
So I take two frock and two underpants and I don't have even sleeper also.
Without sleeper I'm run.
And mom ask where you go?
I say I don't know.
I'm coming back ma'am don't worry.
And then I say to auntie can you drop me today?
And she said not today.
You go back home.
Maybe I'm go two three days after then I take.
And she take me after four days.
She take me in some place and she is a first child boy.
Someone Bengali people.
And she look at me like she said these girls can't work.
I say I will.
I look after your children when you children do pee poo, wash and everything.
Look at all day she because she have a scissoring before.
She can't move and she can't take child like this.
I say I have a spirit.
I have a small sister in the house.
So I have a spirit.
Maybe she say okay you try two three days.
And she always take me and I play with the boy, small boy, three month boy.
And I feed her the milk in the bottle one.
Yeah I'm start work maybe when you seven day I'm crying.
I say I'm go home.
And they really nice person and they say okay you don't like this work.
I say I like work but I'm go home.
I see my brother and sister and I'm again come back.
I see my father then I'm again come back.
Same day I'm go home and they give it to me 20 rupees to bus and everything.
But I can't take bus.
I'm run run run and I'm go home.
I give it 20 rupees to my mom.
And I have lunch there and evening time I'm come back.
And she say come back again.
Same day I say yes.
And then I explain to everything to my mom.
I say mom I'm not sit home.
I have a work now.
Oh what work?
And then I say mom one day I will take you there.
Is nearby home so not too long.
And then I'm go there again.
And I do continue work three month there.
And I send every every month money to home.
Every month they give sometime 40 rupees sometimes 30 rupees monthly.
And sometime they give one rupees to chocolate buy chocolate biscuit and like this.
And now one day with me really really very happy.
You know one day with me really really bad situation.
You know me small baby.
That time I'm not understand.
Now I'm realize this one when you.
The man one day I'm sit with the boy and the.
Like ma'am go out and she said she buy something food and something.
You know the man touch like this.
And then I really feel bad.
And then I'm just crying and crying.
I never say anything to ma'am.
I'm just crying.
And I say I'm go home.
I'm go home.
I go home.
I'm not sit here.
And she thinking I'm just see my family and come back.
Like first time.
And she said OK you go home today.
Tomorrow come back OK.
And then I'm go home.
I say to my mom.
Mom never go back there.
OK.
That time my father slowly slowly recover and.
It'll be better.
Then I'm start work.
OK.
On the fields.
Yeah.
So I'm goes nobody give proper money like this.
Sometimes five rupees sometimes two rupees also.
I've helped someone like cut the rice and everything vegetable.
You know green chili.
I.
Yeah.
And the green.
Green peas.
A lot of people have a green peas outside.
So I'm pick the one and all day.
Slowly slowly slowly slowly I start make money.
And.
Other thing I don't know English and I don't know Hindi I know only Bengali this one.
You know the.
She know.
Part of that.
The party we got a part code.
Yeah.
I start the one full water like this.
I'm see to all day in the water and I I do the one June 1.
Slowly slowly slowly slowly.
Then.
When you are my father is.
Life is better than my father said you start going school you stop everything.
And then again my father take to me school and registered there.
Class three.
Okay.
So I have a habit make money.
Who go school.
I'm going school with bag but I put bag some there and I'm do something in the.
What.
Like something.
Sometime I bring some is being as I'm like this.
I'm never go school and when you four o'clock every children come back then I'm come back home.
And my mother father and mom thinking or every day go school and one day teachers send later to complain later.
And my brother take the letter home and then my father mama also not as you get it they can't read nothing and then my father.
And say you know mom did he not go school.
My mom asked you not go school.
I said no I don't like school.
I like to make money and I like to go work.
I want to catch got the have a portion in.
That's it.
Then my mom say to my father and interest to go school so leave it.
My dad say no.
You must go school.
I say no I'm never go school.
Then I'm run one day to house.
Immediately Calcutta town.
I take train to Blayside.
Direct train to Shalda.
Blays.
I'm go there.
I don't know anybody.
But I have someone is telephone number.
I have a line line number.
I have someone is telephone number.
And then I'm go some STD booth and I call her.
And she is my cousin actually.
And she is I say I'm in the Shalda station.
So how to come your house.
She said you crazy.
Without ask me this one is not my house.
This someone is house.
You not allowed to come here.
I say I'm come because I'm already is a Shalda station.
She said this girl and she said okay you stay there because this town is too busy.
I don't know where you go.
And then she came Shalda station and she pick up me.
And she go there.
That time nearly I'm 11 years old.
And then I'm start to one Madhuri family.
Clean job.
Yes.
Housekeeper clean the house.
And toilet, bathroom everything.
Okay.
Dishes everything.
And that time I don't know how to iron clothes.
So they teach me slowly slowly slowly.
When you one month finish and come back home and I give you too many.
That time I have a salary 500 per month.
Rupees.
Everyone happy because I have a nice job.
Even my mom dad everyone happy.
Have a good money every month.
Then nobody not say anything.
Go school college nothing.
I'm just try try try and slowly slowly.
I do work slowly slowly.
I'm go up up up.
Today 700 tomorrow 1000 like this.
And on day my father say he select some boy to married.
That time I'm 13 years old.
In a village side they married early.
I don't know the boy.
Okay.
I'm never see nothing.
And the boy is not Bengali.
He is a UP people like.
Is this the area is district district is barely nearby Delhi maybe nearby Delhi.
I don't know the boy nothing.
Even I don't have any idea what they do with me.
And then I'm go there.
My father do married and everything finish married.
They take me is a barely.
And then one day when they say something I say why you talk like this people with me like badly they behave badly.
And then I asked to.
I'm not I'm almost some percent.
I don't know that time Hindi language.
So slowly slowly I'm land because I'm thinking like every Bengali people married and go husband house.
Maybe same with me.
But there is something is different.
Because there is three brother and they have a system the three brother one wife.
And then nearly one year I'm finished and then I send some letter to my father.
That time no phone call nothing.
I send some letter to my father because I know Bengali language little bit not really well but slowly slowly I write one letter to my father.
I know my address and everything.
I pushed the letter and I say immediately you came here and my father go there.
And my father say I take my daughter home.
My religion is not allowed to one wife and three brother.
And then they say no you can't take your daughter back.
My father say why.
Because my father don't know I don't know they pay for when they married me they pay bigger money to you know middle the percent who who bring me who bring the boy to Calcutta.
The middle person like you bring me here.
So middle is someone.
The person pay for my first husband pay for nearly Indian rupees 14000 to me.
So I say I'm not bread and sweet.
Someone sell to me.
How to sell to me I'm not gold not anything I'm some person.
So how do they sell me.
And my husband say they have a proof.
They have proof.
And then my father can't allow to take me because some some one why me.
So how to take back.
And then I'm crying I say.
My father I call always Baba I say Baba I'm not.
Sit here I'm not here.
I don't like the person they behave like this and I'm not.
Sit here you take me and my father say you sit here I'm go home I'm decide and maybe I talk to all the people and someone you know chairman member and they will decide what to do.
When you my father go home and my father does discuss with everyone nobody help my father.
Nobody.
Slowly slowly slowly slowly my life 12 years I'm spend there like this.
Really hard work.
Five o'clock I'm get up and I do everything house finish housework and everything no electric no gas nothing there.
And then go outside work with my husband and husband is other brother my father in law everyone go together take lunch.
And I do really hard work.
I don't know I'm pregnant actually.
Then I'm decide this life.
Maybe I'm do suicide okay this life I can't need this life because it's too hard life.
Sorry middle I'm not say anything wrong okay have a lot of thing with me but I'm not never say anything.
Okay and then I'm decide maybe I'm do suicide.
My father can't call not come back to bring me nobody contact with me.
Then I'm decide how to go Calcutta again.
One day I'm decide maybe I'm do suicide then I'm go alone.
Nobody go with me why I'm do suicide.
No I'm never do suicide I'm do other thing I'm go Calcutta again start work and I make money to myself this time.
And then I'm go back to Calcutta how to I'm go you know this one is interesting actually.
I don't have money to go back to Calcutta buy train ticket and nothing.
So I'm very early to Lucknow I'm go by truck.
You know on the high bay bigger bigger truck and I'm on the high bay side I'm just run I'm not say to anybody nobody know I'm go today okay.
I don't have anything only one saree I'm wear that's it and the sleeper.
And they're thinking what to outside you know and then I'm go high bay and I do like this and some truck there and I go barely to Lucknow by truck.
And then I ask how much you have money they see my situation and they buy for me lunch and they say nothing free.
It's okay sister they really nice person maybe I don't know they have a life then I always give blessing to the boy.
And then Lucknow I'm go and there is platform is lot of place and everyone and then I say I'm go Calcutta but I don't have money.
So how much money you have maybe 10 rupees 15 rupees like this and the police man they write some letter and I explain everything is my situation and they write some letter and they give it to me.
And they say you can't you go you know military compartment there you safe because that time I'm really young 22 years old that time.
And then I'm go military compartment and I'm go Shailda station again and then I'm go home I don't know I'm pregnant.
And then when three month finish I'm start vomiting and everything and then my mom take to me is in hospital and then I know I'm pregnant.
And then what to do then my father say you go there because Bengali culture they not allowed to take without husband you not allowed to make children.
So I say no I'm never go back I do work I look after my child but I'm never go back there.
Then I'm again Calcutta every day local train every day I'm go part time I'm go work and evening time I'm come back go work evening time I'm come back.
Nearly when you I have nine and half month then I start work and they give really good money and everything then my first son.
And when you they know I have a son then they start to court please and case and everything they need a child back.
But I fight three years continue I say no this son is mine nobody help me even my mom dad they try to send it back to me I'm never go back I'm never give my son.
Then finally I win the case someone help me I win the case.
And my middle sister married in nearby home and my middle sister her husband is four brother they have a four brother you know the younger one I don't know they like me before.
I don't know this one and then slowly slowly they say married with me I say no I'm already married I have one child and the boy said no I like you I accept you with children with your son.
Then I say not now slowly slowly 2009 then I'm decide I'm do married now with this boy.
My sister is brother in law real sister is real brother in law.
Because he do lot of help me lot of things not only and he look after my son every day because I'm I ask my mom then I'm decide I'm married again.
Then 2009 21st of February I do again married so this year maybe 15 years finish next this this 21st is 15 years I do this second marriage.
And my husband and my children everyone is a home I just make money and give it to family I just make money I can't take one rupees give it everything to family.
And 2014 I lost my father that time I'm go to Mumbai then I'm go Calcutta I I do what what I have a possible I do lot of thing and then I'm realize don't have father mom can't do anything alone.
Then I'm thinking I put my son to boarding school because I don't know people house cheat with my son because that time I don't have father and mom alone can't do anything and my brother can't support really well actually.
He have a family married children and he can't support me starting to that time he can't support me.
And then I I I send my oldest son to boarding school and then I'm decide because people everyday ask I need a one child I need a one child then I'm decide now stop little bit and 15 I stop work and then this second one.
That time already when you work in Mumbai I'm already pregnant actually six month so I'm realize now little bit break so my life only four month break full life four month the second son time first one I do work with pregnancy but second one I take four month off.
And when you my son again one and half month I give it to my husband and mom and again I'm come back to work.
And now this life so everyone know.
So this is my life so when you someone ask me when you happy you count all the way when you I'm happy.
You realize this one I'm happy one day I don't have relaxing one day so when you I'm happy.
So how to I'm explain everyone ask when you someone talk you remember when you know you really excited really happy.
I can't remember this one sorry.
And now I'm just always thinking oh maybe today maybe some work and now I'm waiting for work only.
I'm happy I'm not upset I'm really happy but when you are exactly happy when you I have proper work I'm just waiting for this one now.
Yeah.
Thank you. Thank you for sharing that you just told us so much so thank you. Do you need to have a little break for five minutes.
Okay, yeah.
I find all right.
All right.
We'll move on to talking about the museum.
Yeah. Before that, I wondered if you could tell us a bit about your experience of coming to Wales and how you feel about Wales now.
I like a lot of things here. I have one friend and little bit work there I have 10 hours.
Yeah, I have a lot of colleagues there. Maybe I have proper work here I'm never moved full life.
So yeah, yeah this time I use the safe house but I can't move because I don't have money to go one house you know I can't afford this one.
It's too expensive maybe nearly 1000 pounds to rent and everything so yeah I use safe house.
Maybe one day I have my good work and good salary then I move and go my own house.
Is there anything else you'd like to tell us before we talk about the objects and some memories with the museum.
Anything else you'd like to share about your story.
You said you wanted to do a job and your kids would be better off.
Yeah.
Is this what you want to say?
Yes, I just want one thing right now. I don't want anything else in my life. I don't want money, money, money, anything. I want to do something.
Only kids?
Yes, only my kids.
She says she's not interested in jewelry, clothes, food, nothing. But she needs to have a job so that her kids can benefit and they have a brighter future.
That's all she desires.
What about her son?
He's fine.
I never wanted anything else in my life. I always wear old clothes and I'm already grown up.
I wear the same clothes that someone gave me. I don't want anything else. I really don't want anything else.
I wish my kids could have a better life. I want to know before I die that my kids have a better life.
I'm just a bit emotional as a translator as well.
She says that she has been living with people, had it down, things, clothes and whatever.
She said it's better anymore. It's only before I die I want to make sure my kids have a better future and they have achieved.
That's all she aims for and would like to work for, than the kids.
She's very smart.
Her son is 17.
He's going to go to university.
Where will I send him? He's going to be rich.
He's 17. He's in a boarding school. He would like to go to uni. But she said it's all private. How can he go to uni?
He's choosing only one. The better.
That's all he aims for.
Last year my two sisters helped me a little bit with money.
They gave me nearly 100 pounds. This Indian Rupee is 10,000, 20,000 like this.
And then I pay for my son's boarding school.
There is a pair together, not everyday little bit.
And when my mom has a concert, suddenly she has a concert, then I sold all my jewellery.
I have here like chain and earrings and like this. Then my support would go with me and I sold everything.
And then I said money.
For your mom?
Yeah, for treatment.
Yeah, I handle actually slowly. I don't know how to but I try to.
It's a lot of responsibility.
Yeah. I don't know what will happen with me. I don't know. I don't have any idea.
Thank you again for sharing about your life and your childhood.
Thank you so much.
Should we talk a bit about the things you saw in the museum?
Yeah, maybe a little less stressful.
I like this trip because I am going for the first time. I really enjoy this trip.
When you come back and share with my children and my husband, I send all the pictures.
I really enjoy the one.
I said before I need some relaxing things. Nothing. Food and lunch. I am not worried about this one.
When I go to the museum, I take with me food, lunch with me.
Always when I go somewhere, I take my coffee and I take little bit food because I never ask anyone to this one.
But I just go there. I am really excited because a lot of things. Basically the Durgama.
All right.
Yeah, the one. Really excited. And the blanket. Pink one before my mom make and sell.
Yeah.
So let's start with that.
And the stone house.
So a lot of things like this is.
And the farm house.
Farm house, yeah. You know the cow inside and inside people. Yeah, the farm house.
Same before India. Everyone have like this. This side cow, goat and this side people. Like this, yeah.
Also one more thing, the weighing scale. You know the radhu you take.
The scale is before.
Weighing scale.
One scale, okay.
So that one use every people. Bangladesh and India. Everyone use this.
Everyone have personal this one actually house.
When someone ask something, rice and potato and like this and they wait like this and then they give it to other people.
The shops.
Not only shop, every house there. India every house they have this one.
The weight scale.
Can you tell us a bit more about how you used it and how it was in the home to have the weighing scales?
Yeah, basically my house have this one.
How you used it?
In your home?
I was going to hold it like this.
Why you used it?
Because we used to make a lot of things at home and sell them.
Cook it?
There is not much food. Like my mom and dad make vegetable outside and someone need some origin.
So one kilo, half kilo of iron.
What is it called?
Bitter gourd.
Yeah, bitter gourd.
Yeah, gourd is like a root vegetable.
Yeah.
So cauliflower, a lot of vegetables grow in the house.
Even house, sometimes it is a bigger house and they grow a little bit of origin.
Papaya, banana.
And I have a lot of coconut tree in the house.
So someone need and then even rice also.
You grow rice outside and someone don't have rice and they came and they asked can I give it to me five kilo rice.
And sometimes my mom need money and then she give little bit to sell something vegetable.
Even my father evening time go to, you know, the pick up the fish outside.
And sometimes my father have a big portion fish and then sell little bit to someone.
And they see and they excited, oh, today is really nice fish and every fish is fresh one.
So they, someone ask to sell.
Then my mom give like half kilogram and one kilogram like this.
That's why always my mom have that one.
Again, I forget name.
Yeah.
And a lot of things like this.
Milk, when someone have cow, in the West side everything they have.
When you have a milk and then someone say you sell milk.
Sometimes mom thinking, oh, today I have a two kilo milk.
OK, so I keep half kilo and one and half kilo.
I sell someone when money came, then go shopping, buy some other ingredient, you know.
So mom give like this.
Yeah.
So everything, always my house have this one.
Now have bigger one because my three brother in law, they have a nursery business.
So now have bigger, bigger one like 50 kg, 100 kg one.
So that one is wooden one, bigger, bigger like this.
So before I have this one.
Yeah, small one.
Did you like to watch, watch your mom and dad use it?
Yeah, my mom and dad always use this one.
Maybe two, three years ago, my mom give, you know, someone came and they take the bottle and everything they buy, you know.
What is it called?
Radhiwala.
What is it called in English?
I don't know.
Hang on.
Here it is, you know.
It's not recycling one.
It's the like a second hand shop.
Yeah.
So my mom sell that one because it's broken and you know the metal is petal one, so it's expensive.
So my mom sell and she buy, you know, petal, kolas, what is it called?
Gada.
Gada, gada.
Pots, big pots.
Yeah, she buy that one.
Yeah, she sell and she put little bit money and she buy that one.
Are you okay to carry on with another story?
Yeah.
Yeah, are you sure?
In the other room, you told us a great story about the stone house and the fuel and how
people didn't pay and you had to go sell.
Could you tell us that again for the recording?
This was really good.
So, what do you call it?
The cow dung.
You call it cow dung.
I call it cow dung.
Cow?
Cow dung.
Yeah.
Done.
The cow is done.
Could you say just cow dung?
Yeah, sure.
Yeah, we can call it cow dung and that will do it.
Yeah, cow dung or cow dung.
It's fine.
Oh my God.
I was talking about the cow dung that we use in our country.
The stone house there, the cow dung, the dung that we use to make the dung.
I don't know how to say it in English.
No, they make some of the huts made using the cow dung.
Just say little huts made with cow dung would be fine.
Yeah.
Is it okay?
It's okay, but I can't say it.
It's okay.
Cow dung is also okay.
Yeah.
Why dung is okay?
It's okay.
Okay.
So, you know, Balei side, they make food, not before nobody have gas and electric one,
so they make with fire.
So you know, cow is done, they make something, small, small portion like, you know, like
chapati, not chapati, but look like chapati.
And they put it outside.
They take time to dry, like seven days, six days.
And when they dry, fully dry, then they put like this and little bit time, then it's fully
dry.
Then they make like the stone house.
They like make some house like this.
They store it like one year, two years.
So my mom do lot of things, like not only one thing, not only she's housewife, she's
lot of things.
So she do this one also.
And when she have a straw, and then she sell to someone.
And then someone, they have a...
Like a slow cooking.
Yeah.
So someone have business, like small business, they need that one.
And they came to buy for my mom.
And sometimes they pay immediately.
And sometimes they know.
And my mom ask money and they say, okay, give tomorrow.
Tomorrow I'm come again and give it to you.
And they know tomorrow, after tomorrow, they never come back.
And then sometime mom go there and she ask money and they shout with mom, oh, you don't
have patience and like this.
I say I give it back, but you don't have any patience and like this.
Then mom come back home upset.
What happened?
She said, oh, they not give money because I'm go work and come back.
Then everyone need a food.
So mom don't have money.
So how to buy everything and make food?
And she said, they never pay.
I say why?
Oh, they said tomorrow I will pay and after tomorrow, all every day I'm go there and they
never pay.
I say, okay, let's go.
One day I'm go there and I ask money and they start to shouting with me.
I said, don't shouting with me.
Otherwise I tell every neighbor and they going to know you really bad person.
You know my situation.
You know my position.
I don't have anything in the house.
So why you not pay money?
And then they say, you say everyone then say.
I say, okay, then wait.
And then I'm go with two, three friend and say to everyone, you know the man is cheater,
cheater and they never pay anyone, can't give anyone anything to this man.
And then, you know, my blaze is member.
I'm go to the member and I say, uncle, they never pay.
My mom is money, say to the person and they have then again they ask, talk to everyone
and they say, okay, so maybe one day they have a meeting with everyone where I say,
so what?
You never pay.
That's why every day coming to your house, you not give money.
So I'm say to everyone, then there is meeting, finish end of the meeting.
They pay there because the members say, okay.
How old were you?
That time maybe eight, eight and a half.
Sorry.
It's fantastic.
No, I'm really.
I don't like to people.
I say before, I don't like people cheat with me because I'm never cheat.
Why you cheat with me?
Yeah.
I don't like people cheat with me.
Even my mom, all the time she have a problem because she can't say anything.
She just ask money and they not.
They shout with mom.
They don't have any right to shout with my mom because my mom give thing and they pay for the one.
So why you shout with my mom?
I don't like this one.
Lot of things like this.
Not only one thing.
Village side, you don't know because nobody know.
Only I know.
My life's really, really hard life.
Now I'm, oh, so iPhone, everyone have a television, smart phone, TV.
They have a dining table.
You know, full life I don't have bed.
I'm sleep in the floor.
Full life.
Last year I make one bed.
So everyone surprised, my sister, everyone surprised.
Oh, need bed now.
Why you make bed in the Calcutta?
I say when you come back, then I need a bed because whole life I'm sleep in the floor.
Whole life I don't have bed.
I'm thinking, oh, maybe I spend money to bed is not good.
Okay, I'm sleep in the floor.
Maybe next year, maybe next year, next year, next year.
Now is 47.
I never make bed.
Everyone have a bed.
My mom have a small bed.
My sister, everyone have a bed.
My husband and me sleep in the floor.
My husband say lot of time buy readymade bed.
I say no.
It's lot of money.
Why you waste money?
When you old, can't move, then I make bed.
Now I make.
Last year I make one bed.
I spend little bit money.
You know, one time in the Calcutta tsunami came.
Then I lost my one tree, bigger one.
The tsunami came, then tree fell.
Then I use the one, I make bed.
So you made a bed from tree?
Yeah.
Wow, how did you do that?
Can you tell us?
You know, my husband take the tree, cut small, small portion.
And then go to the machine.
You know machine, they cut wooden tree.
And there, then come back, everything bring home.
And then I call some carpenter because I don't have dad before I have a dad.
Carpenter, nice carpenter, designer carpenter.
But now I call someone outside one and they make home.
They make my, they came my house and they make bed.
Nice bed I have now.
So yeah.
Do you have a picture?
Not here.
Maybe they need, then I send it to anyone.
Nice design one they make now.
Yeah.
Did you think of your bed in museum when you saw the people sleeping on wood?
Did it make you think of sleeping on the floor maybe?
Yeah.
The small, small wood.
My mom have now this, like this, palanquin.
Palanquin.
Yeah.
The Indian one, Indian people call palanquin.
So yeah, small one.
And the inside like this and like this.
Look really nice, isn't it?
So that's why I have a lot of memory in the museum.
Lot of.
So was that the first time you've been to any museum or was it just the first time you've been to that museum?
First time I've been to this museum.
Had you been to other museums before?
First time in any museum.
Wow.
We're privileged to share that day with you.
Thank you.
Really a privilege.
Do you want, we'll finish up soon.
We've been here a while.
You must be very tired.
Yeah.
Do you want to tell us about the blanket or the dougamar?
Which one are both?
We can tell you.
Yeah.
Dougamar or your blanket.
Those are childhood memories.
We have good memories with both.
The dougamar is high.
You know blanket, this blanket made every Bengali.
Maybe.
Is it a blanket or is it a bedspread?
No, it's blanket and bedspread both of make handmade.
The dougamar, both of is different.
Someone is little bit thinner and someone is little bit thicker.
So both of you, someone make both of you same design.
And basically Bengali people use white, white color clothes and they have a design.
They make design handmade.
I do this one.
My mom, my, I'm three sister.
Everyone make this one.
So that one is basically Bengali people when you have a married girls and like daughter is married.
So they give it to with daughter.
Very impressive.
Yeah.
Every mom and now nothing.
Blanket buy outside expensive company one, maybe Jara one, maybe other other company.
That time don't have company.
So they make homemade.
Well, sometime they go neighbor auntie and everyone came and she said, oh, I know this design.
You know, this is the better design.
And they one side they make and one side they make like this lot of the lady sit together and they and that one is Bengali language called Naxikatha.
Naxikatha is name and this Naxikatha have a story also in the book.
Because Katha is a story.
Yeah.
Naxikatha is some story actually.
But when you the Naxikatha start the first embroidered someone this thing, then they start in the book and you know Naxikatha and she know Bengali is really, really important.
The Naxikatha every house have someone maybe they not make they give someone.
Can I make for me this one?
They everyone have a house because it's actually Bengali traditional thing.
This one like Durga Ma Durga Ma also Bengali traditional Hindu Hindu every Hindu every year every single year they they keep money to Durga Puja.
A whole year like you know British people the Christmas they excited when you Christmas day box in there and I'm excited when you Durga Puja came.
Once a year.
Yeah.
So once a year up to what is Durga Puja.
So every mom children everyone need a new cloth new jewelry everyone and then 10 days maybe 10 11 days is off everything factory office everything even train sometime train off.
Chutti because this is the really important to Hindu Bengali Durga Puja.
That's it.
Sometimes people call the Sarah Sarah and after Durga Puja then is Diwali.
So Indian every Indian Hindu is Diwali but Sarah Durga Puja only for Bengali.
So religious religious.
Yeah.
First and last important religion Durga Puja you know the.
Ma ki banaiye.
Yeah.
Durga Ma.
So every year some karigarh came they make pandal.
And there's always one in the house as well isn't it.
Yeah.
This one is in the house.
I just.
This one is a Kalimata every house this one in every house this one this one called Kalima.
And the other one is Durga Ma I just.
We saw we saw it in the museum.
How did it make you feel when you saw.
Oh my god.
Two two two years I'm here and after the three years I'm not never been to the puja nearly five years I've never been to the puja.
So my country when you have a Durga Puja every mom call daughters and a lot of people America London they go back to the puja.
So yeah my mom will really upset every Durga Puja she crying she never go anywhere.
Everyone go my sister brother everyone go out and they enjoy the puja but my my mom not go and my husband two people not go out.
They were waiting everyone go together.
Oh yes I don't know the one is in the medium because suddenly when you see this one I really I really excited and I feel happy but I'm emotional also because when you I see this one.
Basically Hindu people when you go temple they pray and they are emotional actually.
I'm thinking.
I don't know.
When you have some complaint to anyone like now my situation I have a lot of complaints inside you know.
So when you go temple you complain to everything to God.
So yeah so when you see the one oh my God.
And thank you very much for this one because I'm I'm see real life like face to face.
Always my husband send video to Durga Puja time they take picture all the way and my husband send.
And this time I see the face to face so I really like that one.
I'm really happy for them.
Yeah.
And every every every Bengali Hindu Bengali they like Durga Puja.
They really really like Durga Puja.
Everyone spend time with friend family they never go work 10 days 11 days they never go work nothing to do.
Only make food nice nice food every day and nice clothes and they lot of the girls makeup jewelry.
Oh my God Durga Puja is Durga Puja.
It's a festival.
Festival bigger festival.
What's your favorite part of Durga Puja?
Favorite part.
I don't like to do makeup and go enjoy.
I like to every Durga Puja you know every children come back home.
This is the my favorite part.
And everyone together celebrate this one.
I don't like you go you wear jewelry heavy jewelry, Lenga and everything and you go take selfie and this is not my favorite part.
My favorite part is every children come back home sit with mom and dad and they long time is out of country and they come back.
Yeah.
I like that one.
Everyone go parents house that time Durga Puja time everyone.
And who have don't have parents then I have only single mother so my mom sit with me.
So I'm celebrate before I'm celebrate to everyone gather my husband my husband is sister everyone came and they make food have the lunch dinner and they everyone go together out.
All day night they see the pandal.
Pandal.
Yeah.
And light.
Different different lighting and so everyone go out and see the everything enjoy.
Yeah.
Decorate the whole city.
Lighting everywhere is different different design lighting.
You know one one.
It's a wonderful banana.
But then keep keep keep it up.
To decorate the temple.
Yeah.
They need lots of money.
Yeah, they need a lot of money and they start November.
No, not November.
Sorry.
August September.
August middle of the August they start to decorate the city and temple one temple this one Bengali people spend nearly one crore.
Yeah.
Good few thousand pounds.
They spend money lot of money government will help and everything.
Yeah, government will.
Maybe this time I have a lot of video the other mobile.
Maybe I send it some video that then everyone realize how to be because something big even you put light outside of the house.
They have a little bit enough.
So everything is money without money.
Nothing.
But Bengali people early one time do this.
Only once a year.
Yeah.
I'm just worried the time.
Yes.
You're parking.
You must be exhausted.
Thank you so much.
Okay.
Thank you.